10/8/2024

https://behaviouralinvestment.com/2024/10/08/the-noise-factory/
"Is it relevant ?  Is it predictable?"

The Noise Factory

Featured / Joe Wiggins 

What will the Fed do next? How will conflict in the Middle East impact the oil price? What does a new bout of
stimulus mean for the Chinese Equity market? Is the US economy heading into a recession or reflation? Investors
are trapped in a vortex of noise. We are compelled to engage with and react to a rotating cast of inescapably
prominent and impossibly complex issues. This constant state of flux is the lifeblood of the investment industry
but poison for clients. For most investors 99%, of what we see, hear and feel in financial markets is not just
irrelevant to what we are trying to achieve, it actively makes it harder to make good decisions and attain our
goals. Why is noise so ubiquitous and what can we do about it?

Critical to the success of any investor is the ability to cancel out the noise that surrounds us and focus on the
elements that will have a material influence on our outcomes. Given the sheer complexity and chaos inherent in
financial markets this can seem like an impossible task – how can we figure out what is significant?

There are two key criteria we can apply to help us identify harmful noise in financial markets (which is the vast
majority of what we encounter). For any issue or event, we should ask two questions:

– Does it matter?

– Is it knowable?

Unless we can answer both in the affirmative, we can classify it as unhelpful noise.

Let’s take each in turn:

– Does it matter? Here we are seeking to understand whether the subject we are focusing on will actually matter
to what we are trying to achieve. Let’s assume I have a 20-year investment horizon, will the next decision by the
Fed have any obvious impact on my investment goals? Absolutely not. The same can be said for whatever
geopolitical issue is the focus of our attention at any given point in time. If something is likely to have
either no effect or a random influence on us meeting our investment objectives, then it is just noise. Spending
time thinking about it is likely to leave us worse off. 

Even if something does matter – we are confident that some variable or topic will have a material impact on our
investments over the time horizons that matter to us – it can still be noise, because it also must be knowable.

– Is it knowable? Being confident that something actually matters is a pretty high hurdle for investment
information, but even that is not sufficient. For it not to be noise, it must be knowable or predictable. Why?
Well, let’s say I was certain that the near-term decisions of the Fed or the latest geopolitical issue would have
an impact on meeting my investment objectives – this is only meaningful if I know or can predict the outcome of
these things. I need to know both that the Fed decision matters and believe that I can predict it, otherwise,
what am I going to do about it?

If that isn’t tough enough, there is another problem. We often need to know two things – both what is going to
happen and how it will impact financial markets. Many wonderful (lucky) predictions about a particular event have
been rendered worthless because someone got the second part wrong. Forecasting any future occurrence is usually a
herculean task, adding on a prediction of how it will then influence something else (alongside all the other
unforeseeable things that might also impact it) is getting us pretty close to impossible.

So, how can we tell what matters and what is knowable? Well, we can apply some simple tests.

Does it matter?

Test: If I had a crystal ball and knew something would occur in advance, would it change my investment decision
making?

This is a useful test for long-term investors because most things really should not influence our choices. There
is a danger, however, of being overconfident and believing that certain pieces of information will move markets
in an obvious way. Imagine having some foresight of 2020 ‘Covid’ economic data and making investment decisions
based on that – it probably would have ended badly.

Is it knowable?

Test: Is the information already known or is there evidence that people can accurately predict it?

The most obvious piece of information that is in some way knowable is the valuation of an asset. For example,
when bond yields were close to zero we didn’t need to make predictions about future returns being low – we knew
this. Unfortunately, most financial market relevant activity isn’t knowable, it is instead reliant on making bold
predictions about the future, which in complex adaptive systems is quite the ask.

Bringing these aspects together creates a simple framework for addressing the issue of noise in financial markets
and the many problems it causes investors: 

 Does it matter?  Is it knowable?  What to do about it?  
 Yes  Yes  Use the information   
 Yes  No  Diversify   
 No  No  Ignore   

When people talk about current hot topics in financial markets – usually in wildly overconfident ways – we should
be trying to apply this framework before anything else. Ask does the thing being discussed have any relevance
based on my objectives and horizon, and if it does, is it reasonable to believe that it is in anyway knowable or
predictable? The vast majority of things we can ignore, some things matter but are unpredictable so we diversify
our portfolios, and a select few things really matter and should inform the investment decisions we make.

It is fair to say that what matters depends on the individual investor and what they are trying to achieve. So,
for short-term traders many more events and occurrences will seem to matter because they are trying to judge
near-term changes in sentiment. It is expected that they will interact with the market more than those with a
longer horizon. The problem for investors taking such short-run perspectives is that most of the variables that
might matter for them are not predictable in any reasonable or consistent way.

Using this framework leaves something of a puzzle, however. Most investors have long-term objectives, yet almost
everyone seems to be obsessed with perpetuating short-term noise – constantly talking about things that don’t
matter and / or are unknown and unpredictable. What causes such a dynamic? There are many, many factors at play,
but here are a few ideas:

We want to reduce uncertainty: As humans we abhor uncertainty, and there are few things more uncertain than
short-term financial market fluctuations. Engaging with what is happening and listening to people who confidently
explain it (and predict how it will develop) is incredibly comforting. The sense of security it gives us is
entirely false, but it feels real.   

We react to what is in front of us: Even if we try to avoid it, we are surrounded by news of what is unfolding
right now and cannot help but think that what is happening in the moment is more important than anything else.  

We want to sound smart:  Talking about financial markets makes us sound smart. We can quite easily be wrong about
how every major financial market event unfolds yet still sound credible and intelligent whilst doing it. The
alternative is to say “I don’t know” or “it probably doesn’t matter” and that doesn’t do wonders for our
conversations or career. 

We don’t want to look negligent: One of the real challenges faced when trying not to engage with market noise, is
that there will always be some events that will have an impact and matter (particularly in the short-run). We
won’t know what these are beforehand, but after they occur everyone will act as if they were obvious and
inevitable. We cannot risk looking negligent, so it is safer to treat everything as if it might be vital.

We avoid feedback: Does anybody genuinely keep track of the views they have on market events and short-term
market moves? Almost certainly not. Everyone knows why this is, but it doesn’t matter because everyone carries on
in the same fashion. ‘I was wrong yesterday and the day before that, but I will be right tomorrow.’

We focus on what matters to others: Unfortunately, it is not the things that matter to our long-term outcomes
that are most important, but what other people think matters. If everyone else in the industry treats certain
events or issues with the utmost significance, it is almost impossible to be an outlier. The industry acts as if
these things are important, so clients think they are important, and it is rational to conform. 

We want to sell something: Everything always in the end comes down to incentives. Noise, news flow and the
conveyor belt of market events grease the wheels of almost everything that happens in the industry. It is in the
interests of everyone to join in (apart from the clients). 

We are bored: The willingness of investors to engage with market noise always reminds me of a social psychology
experiment where participants were left alone in a room for fifteen minutes. They could either sit and think, or
press a button that would give them an electric shock. 67% of men chose to electrocute themselves. Long-term
investing is usually dull, embracing the noise of financial markets might be painful, but at least it stops us
being bored.


----------
https://www.morningstar.com/funds/when-will-public-private-equity-markets-finally-converge
"Collectively, mutual funds would have been better off allocating their private stakes to public markets over the last 10 years. Further, the holdings are extremely illiquid because of structural features of the venture capital market.

Further, a single company—SpaceX—buttresses the gain. Without Elon Musk’s spaceship company, mutual funds, in aggregate, have lost money on their private company equity positions. SpaceX’s gain is almost entirely unrealized, though. While the company’s shares, so far, have seemed destined to climb as high as the firm’s aspirations to fly to Mars, plenty of other high-flying startups have crashed back to Earth in a short time. Look no further than Rivian Automotive RIVN in 2021, which is down over 90% since its IPO."


When Will Public and Private Equity Markets Finally Converge?
Jack Shannon Senior Manager Research Analyst More from Author
9–11 minutes

The investment world is abuzz with plans for mixing public and private assets in single vehicles that the masses can buy. Private assets, fund companies say, have been out of everyday investors’ grasp for too long, and they are eager to extend their hand.

Mutual funds, though, have been mixing public and private equities for years, though the SEC limits them to holding a maximum of 15% in such illiquid holdings in open-end funds. Much of the current excitement around private assets surrounds closed-end vehicles like interval funds. In those structures, fund companies can create portfolios made up entirely of private companies.

So, has private company equity ownership, in aggregate, helped or hurt investors in mutual funds? And what would that mean for the potential of private equity in interval funds or other closed-end vehicles? I examined those questions and more in my most recent research on mutual funds’ ownership of private company equities.

The results are not encouraging. Collectively, mutual funds would have been better off allocating their private stakes to public markets over the last 10 years. Further, the holdings are extremely illiquid because of structural features of the venture capital market.

As I will explain below, the findings suggest a challenging path forward for any mass-marketed funds, be they interval funds or exchange-traded closed-end funds, that plan to primarily invest directly in private company equities.
In Private Equity, Liquidity Is Everything

The biggest drawback of public vehicles owning private company equities is they are very hard to trade.

As shown below, on average, mutual funds buy or sell less than 1% of the private company shares they own per quarter. Funds’ adding to existing positions via new financing rounds accounts for most of that activity. True secondary market trades are much rarer. If you only look at sales of existing shares, a better proxy for secondary trades, the average quarterly turnover is roughly 0.3% of average assets. Simply put, once a mutual fund owns private company shares, it is usually stuck with them until an IPO.

Quarterly Dollar Volume Traded of Private Company Equites

No new vehicle or wrapper will solve this liquidity problem. A lack of private equity exchanges is not the issue; in fact, multiple competing platforms already exist. Rather, private companies’ illiquidity is a feature created by regulators and the startups themselves, not a bug.

Many companies stay private to avoid making the financial and other disclosures the SEC requires of public companies, which can be onerous. Private companies can only do that for so long, though. The SEC can require them to start public reporting once they have 2,000 shareholders, or 500 unaccredited investors, providing incentives to the startups to keep their shareholder list short.

Equity owners also tend to be more meddlesome than debt providers. Creditors don’t have as much say in how founders and executives run their businesses as equityholders do (that is, until bankruptcy, when bondholders get paid first and can dictate the terms of a reorganization). Private and public stockholders commonly seek to influence, and even change, company management and strategy, another reason private companies want to limit ownership.

To do this, private companies often reserve the right-of-first-refusal on any shareholder’s sale and can also flat out restrict secondary market sales altogether. This can complicate fund management.

Destiny Tech100 DXYZ, an exchange-traded closed-end fund that invests in private companies, for example, claims to have forward agreements to purchase shares of Stripe and Plaid. Both of those companies, however, have disputed those agreements and said they would not allow the transactions to happen. At the very least, the companies could enforce their right-of-first-refusal and step in and buy the shares, depriving the fund of ever holding them. For fundholders of Destiny Tech100, that means they paid for shares the fund never actually owned.

In most cases, a private company’s shares are only as liquid as the company allows them to be.
Does Private Equity’s Illiquidity Pay?

Given the lack of liquidity for private company equities, it would be fair to demand a higher return for investing in them. However, that does not appear to be the case.

As shown below, mutual funds’ private company positions have lost value more frequently and seen fewer explosive winners than the constituents of the Russell 2000 Growth over the same time period. The distribution of mutual funds’ private company equity returns is skewed toward the left (that is, negatively), which does not make for a very attractive asset class, especially after considering the illiquidity.

Annualized Return Distributions 2014-2024: Mutual Funds' Private Company Positions vs Russell 2000 Growth

This is not an indictment on venture capital overall. Rather, these disappointing results are a function of when mutual funds tend to get involved in private markets. Stock mutual funds typically want to invest in private companies with established business models that are generating revenue. Ideally, the companies are already on the road to an IPO, too, as mutual funds do not want capital tied up very long in illiquid assets.

Typically, mutual funds do not invest in startups’ riskier early-stage rounds. Mutual funds established about two thirds of their private company positions in Series D or later rounds. This means they already missed a lot of the upside of successful startups. The explosive venture capital gains everyone hears about accrue to a few, very early-stage investors. Once you get into funding rounds C and later, the potential for headline-grabbing, massive gains gets rare.
Have Mutual Funds Benefited From Owning Private Equity?

The IPO is not the end of the road for private equity investors. As pre-IPO owners, they are usually considered insiders who are subject to a customary six-month lockup period during which they can’t sell their shares. This restriction, it turns out, is very important.

At first blush, the returns on mutual funds’ private stakes do not look terrible. They generated a roughly 41% return (that is, the absolute dollars made on dollars invested), slightly less than the 45% the funds could have earned by putting the same amounts in the S&P 500 over the same respective investment periods. However, several of the private stakes tanked following their IPOs, and the overall return after accounting for lockup periods was less than a third of the S&P 500′s.

Returns on Private Company Equity Positions in Mutual Funds

Further, a single company—SpaceX—buttresses the gain. Without Elon Musk’s spaceship company, mutual funds, in aggregate, have lost money on their private company equity positions. SpaceX’s gain is almost entirely unrealized, though. While the company’s shares, so far, have seemed destined to climb as high as the firm’s aspirations to fly to Mars, plenty of other high-flying startups have crashed back to Earth in a short time. Look no further than Rivian Automotive RIVN in 2021, which is down over 90% since its IPO.

Even an investment in the aggregate portfolio of mutual funds’ private company equities would have disappointed. A portfolio that gathered all of mutual funds’ private company equity positions (on a dollar-weighted basis) and compounded the returns over time would have lagged both the S&P 500 and the Russell 2000 Growth from the end of 2013 through June 2024.

Returns comparison of mutual funds' private company equity positions versus public equity benchmarks
Should Private Equity Be Democratized?

“Should” and “could” are two very different questions, and the “should” answer is only relevant if the “could” answer is yes.

I would argue that, right now, funds that seek to directly own private company equities cannot be democratized at scale given the structural liquidity limitations.

Maintaining a portfolio of private company equities will be exceedingly difficult when liquidity is sparse and fundraising volume is low, even in a semiliquid structure like an interval fund that limits how frequently investors can withdraw their money. New inflows (or fresh capital raises in the case of closed-end funds) would either need to wait on the sidelines until new financing rounds or they will need to be deployed into less appealing companies.

Outflows, which will likely occur during periods of poor performance, will create stark challenges. Interval funds only allow a small percentage of shares to be redeemed in a given time period, which helps prevent fire sales but also means not all investors will be able to exit if redemption requests exceed the quarterly limit. Funding the redemptions is a whole other issue. Mutual funds’ experience with the asset class demonstrates that selling losing positions is no easy feat. As shown below, mutual funds have barely been able to trade any private company after it declined 30% or more in value. Outside of a few anecdotal instances, mutual funds typically have to ride their losers into the ground.

Quarterly Turnover of Mutual Funds' Private Company Equity Positions That Were Down 30+%

These problems won’t stop fund companies from trying to find ways to deliver private equity solutions to everyday investors. Given the liquidity issues, though, any attempt to invest directly in private company equities will be very difficult to pull off at scale and in an investor-friendly manner.

-----------

https://forklightning.substack.com/p/a-data-driven-case-that-ai-has-already

 
A data-driven case that AI has already changed the U.S. labor market

A painfully cautious economist tries – and fails - to avoid the AI hype
 
David Deming
Oct 07, 2024

This morning, the Aspen Economic Strategy Group released a paper I wrote with Chris Ong and Larry Summers called
“Technological Disruption in the Labor Market.” You can find the paper here. Also, Larry and I will be talking
about the paper and about my new survey of generative AI usage in the U.S. at an event at HKS this evening
(Monday 10/7). Please come by if you are local – if not, check out the livestream!

This paper originated as a response to the incessant drumbeat that we are in an era of massive technological
upheaval. Breathless declarations like these populate the opening paragraphs of many consulting white papers and
think pieces, yet they are rarely grounded in hard evidence. Perhaps like other fellow economists, our instinct
is that “things are changing faster than ever” is a lazy crutch argument made by people who either don’t know
much history or want to sell you something.

We were interested in whether there was any empirical truth to “things are changing faster than ever”. So wwe
developed this concept we call occupational “churn” way back in 2017. The idea was to measure the total magnitude
of changes in the frequency of different types of jobs over time.

We calculate “churn” in three steps:

1.      Compute employment shares for each occupation in each year.

2.      Calculate the absolute value of the difference in employment shares for each occupation over a given
period.

3.      Sum up all the absolute values to get a comprehensive measure of labor market “churn”.

For example:

1 Protective service occupations like police and firefighters were about 2.1% of all jobs in the U.S. in 2010 and
 about 1.9% of all jobs in 2024. 

2 The absolute value of the difference between 2010 and 2024 is 0.02 (because |0.019-0.021| = 0.02). 

3 We add those numbers up for all occupation groups to get our measure of churn. An economy where the
 distribution of jobs was completely stable would have churn equal to zero.1 Higher churn means a greater shift
 in the job distribution.

When we measured occupational churn in the 2010s, we discovered that things were not “changing faster than ever”;
in fact, churn had slowed down in the 2010s relative to the 1990s and 2000s. This was novel, at least to us,
because it contradicted popular narratives like the idea that nearly half of all U.S. jobs were at high risk of
automation. We planned to write something about it, but never followed through. 

When we were offered the chance to write this AESG paper, we thought it was a good time to exhume our “cranky
economists tell everyone to calm down” routine.

For the paper we took a very long view, measuring occupation change all the way back to 1880, as early as we have
reliable data.2 The figure below shows our measure of churn over the ten-year periods between the fielding of the
U.S. Census (and more recently, the American Community Survey):

 
The three-decade period from 1940 to 1970 was the most volatile period in the history of the US labor market.3
The transition out of agriculture was accelerating, with the employment share in farming declining by more than
13 percentage points between 1940 and 1970. There was also a significant compositional shift in blue-collar jobs,
with rapid growth in construction and repair work but a big decline in transportation jobs, which was driven by
the shift toward personal automobiles and away from railroads. Professional and administrative-support
occupations also grew rapidly in the middle of the 20th century.

After 1970, the US labor market entered a forty-year period of relative quietude. The 1990s, 2000s, and 2010s
(2010-2019, so pre-pandemic) were among the least volatile periods in history.

We thought this is where the story would end, with us telling everyone to calm down.

But then we started looking at data from the post-pandemic labor market, and we were forced to revisit our prior
beliefs. We found four reasons to think that things might be different this time.

The labor market is no longer polarizing
 Submit 

One of the most important labor market trends in the 1980-2010 period has been “polarization”, meaning employment
growth in both low- and high-paid jobs and declining employment in the middle. A 2006 paper by Autor, Katz, and
Kearney was (I believe) the first to document this phenomenon, which has since been found in many other
countries. The idea was that computers automate routine physical and information processing work (think
machinists and bank tellers), which caused employment in these and other middle wage jobs to decline. At the same
time, we saw growth in basic manual labor and personal services occupations, which don’t pay very well but are
difficult for machines to automate.

The thirty-year polarization trend stopped in the middle of the 2010s, as the figure below shows. Not because
jobs in the middle have come back, but rather because only high-paid jobs are growing anymore (we kept the job
categories constant over the decades.) The pattern after 2016 looks more like “upgrading” than polarization.

 
The decline of personal services occupations
 Submit 

A big driver of labor market polarization was the growth of low-paid service sector jobs like home health aides,
food preparation and service, cleaning and janitorial services, hair stylists, fitness instructors, and childcare
workers.

Employment in service jobs grew very rapidly from 1990 through the early 2010s, and has either flatlined or
fallen since, as the figure below shows. While the pandemic was a big factor – see the drop in food prep and
personal services between 2019 and 2020 – the decline started earlier, around 2014.

 
The boom in STEM employment
 Submit 

We are experiencing incredible growth of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) occupations in the
U.S. As the figure below shows, STEM increased from 6.5 percent of all employment in 2010 to 10 percent in 2024,
an increase of more than 50 percent. Growth has been especially rapid in the last five years. It’s concentrated
mostly in computer and software jobs, but we’ve also seen growth in engineering and science occupations.

The figure also shows rapid employment growth in business and management jobs. The fastest growing occupations in
that category are science and engineering managers, management analysts, and other business operations
specialists. This is especially striking because STEM employment declined slightly between 2000 and 2012. At the
time I argued that this was due to an increased emphasis on social interaction in professional work. I still
think that’s true, but STEM has come back with a vengeance.

 
The growth of STEM and high-tech management jobs coincides with increased capital investment in AI-related
technologies. Spending on software and information processing equipment currently sits at about 4 percent of GDP,
which is higher than at any point since the dot-com bubble in 2001. Private R&D spending is currently at an
all-time high of about 2.7 percent of GDP. Much of this spending is directly related to STEM hiring, as well as
investments in computing capacity like data centers.

 
Retail sales jobs are disappearing rapidly
 Submit 

The final labor market trend we uncovered was a very rapid decline in retail sales jobs, show in the figure
below. Retail sales hovered at around 7.5 percent of employment from 2003 to 2013 but has since fallen to only
5.7 percent of employment, a decline about 25 percent in just a decade. Put another way – the U.S. economy added
19 million total jobs between 2013 and 2023 but lost 850 thousand retail sales jobs. The decline started well
before the pandemic.

 
How much do these recent changes have to do with AI?
 Submit 

Since ChatGPT has only been around a couple of years, it is probably too early to see any direct impact of
generative AI on the labor market. Still, so-called “predictive” AI has been around a lot longer than generative
AI. Companies like Amazon have been using predictive AI tools like machine learning since the mid 2010s to
produce personalized prices and product recommendations, optimize inventory management, and other innovations
(see my NYT column about this back in 2020 if you are interested).

Could predictive AI be responsible for the decline in retail sales jobs? It’s hard to say for sure, but I would
note that online retail has been around a long time (remember Pets.com?). Why did retail jobs start to decline in
the early 2010s specifically, after holding steady for more than two decades after the dot com boom?

There were many important AI developments in the early 2010s. Big tech companies started investing heavily in AI
in response to the rapid performance improvements realized by deep learning models (like AlexNet) that were
trained on Nvidia-produced GPU chips. On the commercial side, Amazon bought Kiva Systems in 2012 (now called
Amazon Robotics), a company that uses AI-directed mobile robots to stock and manage inventory.

Also, it’s surely true that the increase in STEM employment was at least partially driven by corporate
investments in AI. Interestingly, “stockers and order fillers” and “light delivery service truck drivers” have
grown by 60 percent and 29 percent respectively since 2023, compared to 14 percent overall job growth. None of
this constitutes proof, but it is a decent circumstantial case that AI has already made its presence felt in the
US labor market.

The broader context is a decades-long trend of occupational upgrading in white collar work. Administrative and
clerical jobs like financial clerks and secretaries have collectively declined from 7.8 percent of all jobs in
1990 to only 3.3 percent today. At the same time, management and business jobs have grown rapidly. Some of this
is probably relabeling, but it also reflects a genuine shift away from routine office functions and toward
analysis, strategy, and decision-making.

I can see a future where AI commodifies most white-collar office work. Tasks like writing a business plan,
organizing the office calendar, and generating and editing software code can be done easily and cheaply by
current AI models. I doubt that future is arriving as soon as people think for the reasons I wrote about a few
weeks ago – adoption happens slowly, and there are a lot of kinks to be worked out. But it seems likely to happen
eventually, even if we have another dot-com style bust in between.

I am not predicting an AI boom. But overall, I think we need to consider the possibility that the ground is
moving under our feet.

1

The virtues of this measure of labor market change are that it is symmetric, it holds overall employment
constant, and it covers all occupations and treats them all equally. The major limitation is that it only
accounts for occupation change, not other big sources of disruption such as the need to relocate from farms to
cities for a job in industry, or more recently the shift toward remote work. Don’t think of it as a comprehensive
measure, but rather as a good start.

2

A serious complication for analyses like these is how you consistently categorize occupations over time. The
paper and the technical appendix get into all those details, but the TL;DR is that we had to aggregate
occupations broadly enough to give us consistent data. There were no occupational therapists in 1880, but there
were health professionals like doctors and nurses.

3

The 1880-1900 period was extraordinarily disruptive, mostly because of the transition out of farming (no data is
available for 1890, and this lack of data may overstate the pace of change).
